[docs] Coin registry (#23750)
MystenLabs/sui: docs/content/standards/currency.mdx

## Fungible tokens

In the Sui blockchain ecosystem, the `Currency<T>` type represents open-loop fungible tokens (see `Token<T>` for closed-loop tokens). Currencies are denominated by their type parameter, `T`, which is also associated with metadata (like name, symbol, decimal precision, and so on) that applies to all instances of `Currency<T>`. The `sui::coin_registry` module exposes an interface over `Currency<T>` that treats it as fungible, meaning that a unit of `T` held in one instance of `Currency<T>` is interchangeable with any other unit of `T`, much like how traditional fiat currencies operate.

## Currency creation 

The Coin Registry is a centralized system that provides unified currency management through the `sui::coin_registry` module. 

:::info

The registry is a system-level shared object located at address `0xc`.

:::

<details>
<summary>
`sui::coin_registry` module
</summary>
<ImportContent source="crates/sui-framework/packages/sui-framework/sources/registries/coin_registry.move" mode="code" />
</details>

#### Core components

> **`CoinRegistry`:** The main system object that coordinates all currency-related operations. This shared object serves as the entry point for all registry operations and is created once during network initialization.

Reviewer: Worth mentioning the address / ID of the object: `0xC`

**`Currency<T>`:** The core of the registry system, storing comprehensive information about each coin type including:
- **Metadata management:** Basic currency information like name, symbol, decimals, description, and icon URL.
- **Supply tracking:** Maintains supply state information (fixed, burn-only, or unknown).
- **Regulatory status:** Tracks whether the coin is regulated with deny list capabilities.
- **Capability references:** Links to `TreasuryCap`s and `MetadataCap`s for the coin type.
- **Extensibility:** Includes extra fields for future enhancements.

#### Supply states

The registry supports three different supply management models:

- **Fixed supply:** The total supply is permanently locked and cannot be changed.
- **Burn-only supply:** New coins cannot be minted, but existing coins can be burned.

> - **Unknown supply:** Traditional model where the `TreasuryCap` holder controls minting and burning.

Reviewer: I would change wording slightly - "uncontrolled" or maybe "default"

    Use the `new_currency` function at any time after the currency type is published. The function immediately creates a shared `Currency<T>` object.

    <ImportContent source="crates/sui-framework/packages/sui-framework/sources/registries/coin_registry.move" mode="code" fun="new_currency" signatureOnly noComments />

- **One-Time Witness (OTW) creation:**

    :::caution 

    OTW creation of a new currency is a two-step process. The initialization process begins with package publication. Then a call to `finalize_registration` is needed to place the currency into the registry.

    :::

    The `new_currency_with_otw` function uses an OTW for uniqueness proof.

    <ImportContent source="crates/sui-framework/packages/sui-framework/sources/registries/coin_registry.move" mode="code" fun="new_currency_with_otw" signatureOnly noComments />

#### Currency initialization

Both creation methods return a `CurrencyInitializer<T>` that allows for additional configuration:

- **Make regulated:** Add deny list capabilities.
- **Set supply model:** Choose between fixed, burn-only, or flexible supply.
- **Add extensions:** Include additional fields for custom functionality.

> <ImportContent source="crates/sui-framework/packages/sui-framework/sources/registries/coin_registry.move" mode="code" struct="CurrencyInitializer" />

Reviewer: In rendered docs says "Struct is not found"
<img width="705" height="398" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/59a19081-31bc-42e6-932e-bb59ebd5683c" />

2. **Regulatory migration:** For coins with deny list capabilities, use:
   - `migrate_regulated_state_by_metadata<T>()`: Migrate based on existing metadata.

        <ImportContent source="crates/sui-framework/packages/sui-framework/sources/registries/coin_registry.move" mode="code" fun="migrate_regulated_state_by_metadata" noTitle signatureOnly noComments />
   
   - `migrate_regulated_state_by_cap<T>()`: Migrate based on deny capability.
    
        <ImportContent source="crates/sui-framework/packages/sui-framework/sources/registries/coin_registry.move" mode="code" fun="migrate_regulated_state_by_cap" noTitle signatureOnly noComments />

### Migration function mappings

Smart contracts should update logic that relies on the `coin` module to use the `coin_registry` instead:  

- `coin::create_currency` -> `coin_registry::new_currency_with_otw`
- `coin::create_regulated_currency_v2` -> `coin_registry::new_currency_with_otw`

<ImportContent source="crates/sui-framework/packages/sui-framework/sources/registries/coin_registry.move" mode="code" fun="new_currency_with_otw" signatureOnly noComments />

## Best practices

> ### For coin creators

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### For currency creators
```

- **Set supply model:** Choose between fixed, burn-only, or flexible supply.
- **Add extensions:** Include additional fields for custom functionality.

<ImportContent source="crates/sui-framework/packages/sui-framework/sources/registries/coin_registry.move" mode="code" struct="CurrencyInitializer" />

#### Currency finalization

A currency is not complete until after you call the `finalize` function. The function returns the `MetadataCap<T>` for metadata management. If you used an OTW to create the currency, the function sends the currency to the coin registry, otherwise it creates the final shared `Currency<T>` object.

<ImportContent source="crates/sui-framework/packages/sui-framework/sources/registries/coin_registry.move" mode="code" fun="finalize" signatureOnly />

If you publish a package that uses an OTW to create a currency in the package `init` function, then a call must be made to `finalize_registration` after initialization. The function transforms the currency into a shared object. 

<ImportContent source="crates/sui-framework/packages/sui-framework/sources/registries/coin_registry.move" mode="code" fun="finalize_registration" signatureOnly />

## Regulated currency

> The Currency standard includes the ability to create regulated coins. Use the `make_regulated` function during the initialization phase, before calling `finalize`. The function adds deny list capabilities to the `Currency<T>` and tracks the regulatory status within the coin registry. The function returns a `DenyCap` that allows the bearer to maintain the list of addresses on the deny list.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Currency Standard supports creating regulated coins. Use the `make_regulated` function during the initialization phase before calling `finalize`. The function adds deny list capabilities to the `Currency<T>` and tracks the regulatory status within the coin registry. The function returns a `DenyCap` that allows the bearer to maintain the list of addresses on the deny list.
```

<details>
<summary>
Regulated coin example
</summary>
<ImportContent source="examples/move/coin/sources/regcoin_new.move" mode="code" />
</details>

### `DenyList` object

> The list of addresses that aren't able to use a particular regulated currency is held within a system-created `DenyList` shared object. If you have access to the `DenyCap`, then you can use the `sui::coin` module to maintain the list of users. Use the functions `coin::deny_list_v2_add` and `coin::deny_list_v2_remove` functions to add and remove addresses.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A `DenyList` shared object created by the system contains addresses that aren't able to use a particular regulated currency. If you have access to the `DenyCap`, then you can use the `sui::coin` module to maintain the list of users. Use the functions `coin::deny_list_v2_add` and `coin::deny_list_v2_remove` functions to add and remove addresses.
```

### Global pause switch

> Regulated currencies include an `allow_global_pause` Boolean field. When set to `true`, the bearer of the `DenyCapV2` object for the currency coin type can use the `coin::deny_list_v2_enable_global_pause` function to pause coin activity indefinitely. Immediately upon the bearer initiating the pause, the network disallows the coin type as input for any transactions. At the start of the next epoch (epochs last ~24 hours), the network additionally disallows all addresses from receiving the coin type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Regulated currencies include an `allow_global_pause` Boolean field. When set to `true`, the bearer of the `DenyCapV2` object for the currency coin type can use `coin::deny_list_v2_enable_global_pause` and `coin::deny_list_v2_disable_global_pause` to pause or resume coin activity, respectively.

Immediately upon the bearer initiating a pause of coin activity, the network disallows the coin type as input for any transaction indefinitely. At the start of the next epoch, the network disallows all addresses from receiving the coin type.
```

When the bearer of the `DenyCapV2` object for the currency coin type removes the pause using `coin::deny_list_v2_disable_global_pause`, the coins are immediately available to use again as transaction inputs. Addresses cannot receive the coin type, however, until the following epoch.

The global pause functionality does not affect the deny list for the currency. After clearing the pause for the currency, any addresses included in the deny list are still unable to interact with the currency's coin.

## `TreasuryCap`

When you create a currency using the `coin_registry::new_currency` or `coin_registry::new_currency_with_otw` functions, the publisher of the smart contract that creates the coin receives a `TreasuryCap` object upon finalization of the currency. The `TreasuryCap` object is required to mint new currency coins or to burn current ones (depending on currency supply state). Consequently, only addresses that have access to this object are able to maintain the currency supply on the Sui network.

> The `TreasuryCap` object is transferable, so a third party can take over the management of a currency that you create if you transfer the `TreasuryCap`. After transferring the capability, however, you are no longer able to mint and burn coins yourself.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `TreasuryCap` object is transferable, so a third party can take over the management of a currency that you create if you transfer it to them. After transferring the object, you are no longer able to mint and burn coins yourself.
```

## Currency metadata

> Currency metadata is stored centrally within the `Currency<T>` object in the registry. Metadata updates are controlled by the `MetadataCap<T>` capability, which can be:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currency metadata is stored within the `Currency<T>` object in the registry. Metadata updates are controlled by the `MetadataCap<T>` capability, which can be:
```

The fields of the metadata objects include the following:

#### `CoinMetadata`

| Name          | Description                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| ------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `registry`          | The `CoinRegistry` system object ID (`0x3`).                                                                                                                                                             |
| `decimals`    | The number of decimals the token uses. If you set this field to `3`, then a token of value `1000` would display as `1.000`.                                                                              |
| `name`        | Name of the coin.                                                                                                                                                                                        |

> | `symbol`      | Symbol for the coin. This might be the same value as `name`, but is typically fewer than five all capital letters. For example, `SUI` is the `symbol` for the native coin on Sui but its `name` is also `SUI`. **Only ASCII printable characters allowed**.|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `symbol`      | Symbol for the coin. This might be the same value as `name`, but is typically fewer than five letters, all capitals. For example, `SUI` is the `symbol` for the native coin on Sui but its `name` is also `SUI`. **Only ASCII printable characters allowed**.|
```

### Burn

For currencies with a burn-only supply status, coins can be burned directly through the registry using `coin_registry::burn` and `coin_registry::burn_balance` functions without requiring the `TreasuryCap`.

<ImportContent source="crates/sui-framework/packages/sui-framework/sources/registries/coin_registry.move" mode="code" fun="burn,burn_balance" signatureOnly noComments />

For currencies with an unknown supply status, use the `coin::burn` function to destroy current coins.

<ImportContent source="crates/sui-framework/packages/sui-framework/sources/coin.move" mode="code" fun="burn" signatureOnly noComments />

The signature shows that only the `TreasuryCap` and coin object you want to burn are necessary inputs, returning the amount by which the supply was decreased (value of the coin). The function does not allow you to burn more coins than are available in the supply.

## Adding and removing addresses to and from the deny list

> The deny list is only applicable to regulated coins. As mentioned previously, when you create a regulated coin you receive a `DenyCapV2` that authorizes the bearer to add and remove addresses from the system-created `DenyList` object. Any address on the list for your coin is unable to use the coin as an input to transactions starting immediately upon being added. At the epoch that follows address addition to the deny list, the addresses additionally cannot receive the coin type. In other words, an address that gets added to the deny list for a coin type is immediately unable to send the coin. At the start of the following epoch, the address is still unable to send the coin but is also unable to receive it. From that point, the address cannot interact with the coin until expressly removed from the deny list by the `DenyCapV2` bearer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The deny list is only applicable to regulated coins. When you create a regulated coin, you receive a `DenyCapV2` that authorizes the bearer to add and remove addresses from the system-created `DenyList` object. Any address on the list is unable to use the coin as an input to transactions starting immediately once added, meaning the address cannot send the coin.

Once the deny list has been altered, the following epoch restricts the newly added address from receiving the coin type. From this point, the address cannot interact with the coin until expressly removed from the deny list by the `DenyCapV2` bearer.
```

### Add address to deny list

> Use the `coin::deny_list_v2_add` function to add the provided address to the deny list for your coin. The signature for the function is:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the `coin::deny_list_v2_add` function to add an address to the deny list for your coin. The signature for the function is:
```

<ImportContent source="crates/sui-framework/packages/sui-framework/sources/coin.move" mode="code" fun="deny_list_v2_remove" noComments />

When using this function, you provide the `DenyList` object (`0x403`), the `DenyCapV2` you receive on coin creation, the address to remove from the list, and the transaction context. If you try to remove an address that isn't on the list, you receive an `ENotFrozen` error and the function aborts. After calling this function, the address you provide is able to use your coin by the next epoch.

### Using an SDK

You can use either the TypeScript or Rust SDK to manipulate the addresses held in the `DenyList` for your coin. The following examples are based on the [regulated coin sample](https://github.com/MystenLabs/regulated-coin-sample).

<Tabs groupId="sdk-language">

<TabItem label="TypeScript" value="typescript">

```ts
const tx = new Transaction();

tx.moveCall({
    target: `0x2::coin::deny_list_v2_add`,
    arguments: [
        tx.object(<SUI-DENY-LIST-OBJECT-ID>),
        tx.object(<DENY-CAP-ID>),
        tx.pure.address(options.address),
    ],
    typeArguments: [<COIN-TYPE>],
});
```

> - `<SUI-DENY-LIST-OBJECT-ID>` is `"0x403"`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `<SUI-DENY-LIST-OBJECT-ID>` is `"0x403"`.
```

> - `<DENY-CAP-ID>` is the object of type `DenyCapV2<REGULATED_COIN>` you receive from publishing the contract

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `<DENY-CAP-ID>` is the object of type `DenyCapV2<REGULATED_COIN>` you receive from publishing the contract.
```

> - `options.address` is the address to ban

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `options.address` is the address to ban.
```

    <ImportContent source="crates/sui-framework/packages/sui-framework/sources/registries/coin_registry.move" mode="code" fun="is_metadata_cap_deleted" noTitle signatureOnly noComments />

- `treasury_cap_id<T>()`: Get treasury cap object ID.

    <ImportContent source="crates/sui-framework/packages/sui-framework/sources/registries/coin_registry.move" mode="code" fun="treasury_cap_id" noTitle signatureOnly noComments />

- `metadata_cap_id<T>()`: Get metadata cap object ID.

    <ImportContent source="crates/sui-framework/packages/sui-framework/sources/registries/coin_registry.move" mode="code" fun="metadata_cap_id" noTitle signatureOnly noComments />

### Regulatory information

- `is_regulated<T>()`: Check if coin is regulated.

    <ImportContent source="crates/sui-framework/packages/sui-framework/sources/registries/coin_registry.move" mode="code" fun="is_regulated" noTitle signatureOnly noComments />

- `deny_cap_id<T>()`: Get deny cap object ID.

    <ImportContent source="crates/sui-framework/packages/sui-framework/sources/registries/coin_registry.move" mode="code" fun="deny_cap_id" noTitle signatureOnly noComments />

## Update coin metadata

> Metadata updates require the `MetadataCap<T>` that is only available to the bearer of the `TreasuryCap` for a currency. The bearer of the `TreasuryCap` can claim the `MetadataCap` using the `claim_metadata_cap` function only once. The `Currency` tracks the claimed status of the capability through its `metadata_cap_id` field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Metadata updates require `MetadataCap<T>`, which is only available to the bearer of the `TreasuryCap` for a currency. The bearer of the `TreasuryCap` can claim the `MetadataCap` using the `claim_metadata_cap` function only once. The `Currency` tracks the claimed status of the capability through its `metadata_cap_id` field.
```

- `set_description<T>()`: Update coin description.

    <ImportContent source="crates/sui-framework/packages/sui-framework/sources/registries/coin_registry.move" mode="code" fun="set_description" noTitle noComments signatureOnly />

- `set_icon_url<T>()`: Update icon URL.

    <ImportContent source="crates/sui-framework/packages/sui-framework/sources/registries/coin_registry.move" mode="code" fun="set_icon_url" noTitle noComments signatureOnly />

Manage the metadata capability using:

- `claim_metadata_cap<T>()`: Claim the metadata capability one time.

    <ImportContent source="crates/sui-framework/packages/sui-framework/sources/registries/coin_registry.move" mode="code" fun="claim_metadata_cap" noTitle noComments signatureOnly />

- `delete_metadata_cap<T>()`: Permanently delete the capability to prevent future updates.

    <ImportContent source="crates/sui-framework/packages/sui-framework/sources/registries/coin_registry.move" mode="code" fun="delete_metadata_cap" noTitle noComments signatureOnly />

    :::caution

    Deleting the `MetadataCap` using `delete_metadata_cap<T>()` is an irreversible action.

    :::

## Migration from Coin to Currency Standard

> The Currency Standard replaces the legacy Currency Standard. Sui provides a migration path from the `CoinMetadata<T>` system while maintaining backward compatibility.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Currency Standard replaces the legacy Coin Standard. Sui provides a migration path from the `CoinMetadata<T>` system while maintaining backward compatibility.
```

The migration system is designed with specific constraints to maintain data integrity and preserve existing functionality. Migration can only occur permissionlessly when done by reference, meaning the original `CoinMetadata` object remains intact while its data is copied to create a new `Currency` entry in the registry. This approach allows for safe registration of new currency data and updates to existing currency data, but only as long as the `MetadataCap` has not yet been claimed.

> The system cannot allow permissionless migration by value, however, where the original `CoinMetadata` object would be consumed or destroyed during migration. This restriction exists because some coins have governance mechanisms that control `CoinMetadata` updates - allowing value-based migration would irreversibly break these existing governance workflows by destroying the metadata objects that governance systems expect to manage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The system cannot allow permissionless migration by value, however, where the original `CoinMetadata` object would be consumed or destroyed during migration. This restriction exists because some coins have governance mechanisms that control `CoinMetadata` updates. Allowing value-based migration would irreversibly break those existing governance workflows by destroying the metadata objects that governance systems expect to manage.
```

This design preserves backward compatibility while enabling a smooth transition to the centralized registry system, protecting existing governance mechanisms until owners are ready to migrate fully to the new system.

Some of the benefits to migrate to the Coin Registry include:

- **Centralized management:** Single source of truth for all coin information.
- **Enhanced features:** Access to advanced supply models and regulatory tracking.
- **Ecosystem integration:** Better support for wallets, exchanges, and dApps.
- **Future-proofing:** Access to ongoing registry enhancements.

### Migration process

1. **Metadata migration:** Use `migrate_legacy_metadata<T>()` to create a new `Currency<T>` entry based on existing `CoinMetadata<T>` information.
    <ImportContent source="crates/sui-framework/packages/sui-framework/sources/registries/coin_registry.move" mode="code" fun="migrate_legacy_metadata" noTitle signatureOnly noComments />

> 2. **Regulatory migration:** For coins with deny list capabilities, use:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Regulatory migration:** For coins with deny list capabilities, use:
```

   - `migrate_regulated_state_by_metadata<T>()`: Migrate based on existing metadata.

        <ImportContent source="crates/sui-framework/packages/sui-framework/sources/registries/coin_registry.move" mode="code" fun="migrate_regulated_state_by_metadata" noTitle signatureOnly noComments />
   
   - `migrate_regulated_state_by_cap<T>()`: Migrate based on deny capability.
    
        <ImportContent source="crates/sui-framework/packages/sui-framework/sources/registries/coin_registry.move" mode="code" fun="migrate_regulated_state_by_cap" noTitle signatureOnly noComments />

### Migration function mappings

> Smart contracts should update logic that relies on the `coin` module to use the `coin_registry` instead:  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Smart contracts should update logic that relies on the `coin` module to use the `coin_registry` module instead:  
```

- `coin::create_currency` -> `coin_registry::new_currency_with_otw`
- `coin::create_regulated_currency_v2` -> `coin_registry::new_currency_with_otw`

<ImportContent source="crates/sui-framework/packages/sui-framework/sources/registries/coin_registry.move" mode="code" fun="new_currency_with_otw" signatureOnly noComments />

## Best practices

### For currency creators

- **Use OTW creation:** Prefer the OTW-based creation for better uniqueness guarantees.
- **Set supply model early:** Decide on supply model during initialization (fixed, burn-only, or flexible).
- **Consider regulation:** Evaluate whether deny list capabilities are needed.
- **Manage metadata cap:** Decide whether to keep, transfer, or delete the metadata capability.

### For dApp developers

> - **Query registry first:** Check the registry for coin information before fallback to legacy methods.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Query registry first:** Check the registry for coin information before falling back to legacy methods.
```
